FPP

6.1) Time Series decomposition.

Mutiplicative decomposition common with economic time series.

The trend-cycle shows the overall movement in the series, ignoring 
the seasonality and any small random fluctuations.

Deseasonalization of data, when do we use deseasonalized data:
unemployment.

Seasonally adjusted data has trend cycle as well as remainder component,
Not smooth and downturn and upturn can be misleading.


If the purpose is to look at downturn or upturns then use trend-cycle 
component rather than seasonally adjusted data.


6.2) Moving Averages
(Question : How to find m for different time periods?)
If the seasonal period is odd and of order m, then m-MA.
If the seasonal period is even and of order m, then 2 X m-MA.

6.3) Drawbacks of classical decomposition:
 1) Unavailabity of trend components for first few and last few months, no remainder component too.

 2) tends to oversmooth rapid rise and fall.
 
 3) Tends to assume that seasonal component repeats from year to year.
    Air conditioning example.

 4) Not robust to unusual values. Air traffic strike example. 

Sophisticated ways of decombosition

6.4) X11  (Originated in the US Census Board and Statistics Canada)'

	Based on classical decomposition, but some extra steps and features to overcome the drawback.
	trend-cycle esitmate available for all obs including end points.
	seasonal component allowed to vary over time.
	Can handle trading day variation, holiday effects and effects of known predictors.(HOW?)
	Robust to outliers and level shifts in TS.
	It handles both additive and multiplicative decomposition.
	Available in seasonal package in R.

6.5) SEATS decompositon (Seasonal Extraction in ARIMA TS, developed by Bank of Spain)

	Works only with quarterly or monthly data.
	daily, hourly, weekly require an alternative approach.

	Available in seasonal package in R.


6.6) STL decompositon (Seasonal and Trend decomposition using Loess)

	Many advantages over classical, seats and x11.

	* Will handle any type of seasonality not just monthly and quarterly data.
	* Seasonal component is allowed to change over time, rate of change can be controlled by user.
	* Smoothness of trend-cycle can be controlled by user.
	* Robust to outlier. (User can specify a robust decomposition)
	Unusual observations will not affect the esitmates of trend-cycle and seasonal components. They will,
	however affect the remainder.

	Disadvantage : 
	Does not handle trading day or calendar variations.
	Only Additive Decompose. Can be used for multiplicative using boxcox transform. (0<gamma<1)
	gamma = 0 multiplicative
	gamma = 1 additive

	